In the first 3 months of 2026, we have
already seen some of the biggest LLM
architectural breakthrough in a long
time. While a good chunk of 2025 was
playing around with RL to apply it onto
LLMs, which got us more and more
acronyms that I don't even know what
they stand for, I am so glad that my
videos this year is not going to be
spending 10 minutes explaining an
acronym that might not even be applied
at practice. Because this time, Kimi
Moonshot, or I'm just calling them Kimi
AI cuz it's easier, they have published
this new research called attention
residuals and have already tested at
scale with their model, which made this
approach extra promising. Not only that,
the idea is so much cleaner and so
intuitive, which made me think this
might actually be a defining and pivotal
paper for this year. And can you imagine
one of the key person that's behind this
is only a 16-year-old high schooler.
This is like a different CS than what I
was doing when I was 16. But before we
dive into it, with so many new models
that are coming out left and right,
keeping off their subscriptions just to
try them may not be the most optimal way
to spend your money. Because why would
you even pay five subscriptions when
there is an all-in- one bundle that lets
you use them for just 10 bucks a month.
This website called Matt Mood AI
provides you with models ranging from
Claude to GPT, Gemini, Llama, Mistral,
Grok, Deep Seek, Perplexity, Flux, Nano
Banana, and Recraft. So, if you want to
try out different LLMs or even image
generation, they have it for you all in
one place. On top of that, this platform
also lets you re-prompt, compare
answers, and have models challenge each
other. So, you get to pick the higher
quality outputs while not needing to
switch between 10 tabs to check manually
which one is the best. This multi-model
workflow be capable of analyzing
documents and images, use deep research
through Perplexity, and even do voice
chat and dictation when you want to move
faster. And if you have repetitive
tasks, you can also just use the project
function where you can create your own
custom Matt Moods with your own
instructions, preferred model that
matches your habits, and keep everything
organized instead of starting from
scratch every time. So, if you want one
clean place to use the best models
without investing in it so much
subscription money, check them out now
using the link down in the description,
and thank you, Matt Mouw, for sponsoring
this video. Anyways, this time we got a
brand new concept. But, compared to all
previous new deep seek architectures
that was released in the last few
months, I think this is a lot easier to
understand. Well, hopefully. So, in a
typical transformer diagram, it looks
pretty straightforward, right? This
basically indicates there are n repeated
layers. So, when you unroll it, it'll
actually look like a thin long stick.
You can also check out this 3D
visualization to trace through the
numbers one by one yourself. Even though
a common theme in AI is that the more
layers, the better, there is still a
ceiling to this stacking. Because the
more transformer layers there are, the
more information gets piled on top of
each other with no filtering. Like,
imagine this. You take notes from every
single lecture you attend, but after
each class, you paste all your notes
into ChatGPT and ask it to summarize
everything so far into a single
document. Then, after the next lecture,
you do the same thing again, but now
ChatGPT is summarizing a summary plus
the new notes. And, you keep repeating
this process every time there's a
lecture. At first, it probably works
fine. But, over time, details start to
disappear. Early lectures get compressed
into vague high-level ideas, while newer
information dominates the summary. And,
in the end, you will no longer have
access to the original notes, only this
repeatedly distilled version. So, by the
end of the semester, you're studying
from a heavily compressed summary of
summaries, where important nuances from
earlier lectures are effectively gone.
The same problem kind of applies to
layers within transformers. As the model
gets deeper, all previous layer outputs
are repeatedly compressed into a single
representation, causing earlier
information to be progressively diluted
with no way to recover or selectively
access it. Not only that, since
everything is summed together with equal
weights, uh later layers are competing
against the accumulated signal of all
previous layers. So, in order to stand
out, they're forced to produce
increasingly larger outputs with larger
magnitudes. Otherwise, their
contribution gets drowned out. Over
time, this leads to a kind of imbalance
where earlier information is diluted
while later layers grow
disproportionately just to be noticed.
And the representation keeps getting
bigger, but not necessarily more
precise. And this is what the
researchers called the pre-norm dilution
problem. This exact problem was also the
same problem recurrent neural networks
had over the sequence dimension, which
led to the downfall of RNNs at scale as
it is a more naive way of compressing
all prior information into a single
state, which attention mechanisms
completely avoids. Then, why haven't we
done the same thing for depth? So, this
is what the Kimi team at Moonshot AI
decided to fix. Instead of being forced
to inherit a single mixed
representation, what if a layer can
directly look at earlier outputs and
assign them different weights based on
the current input? This turns depth from
a blind accumulation process into a
selective retrieval mechanism where
information isn't lost through repeated
compression, but remains accessible and
can be reused when needed. To put the
idea simply, it's just attention over
the depth of the network. So, it's kind
of like rotating attention by 90°. So,
instead of only using attention across
tokens in the sequence from left to
right, the model also applies attention
vertically across layers, letting the
model selectively retrieve information
from its own computation history. Under
the hood, this works by building
connections from every previous layer
directly into the current one, kind of
like a residual path. And a residual
path typically appears within a layer
where you take the input and add it back
after some transformation. The purpose
of this is to preserve information and
make training stable by giving the model
a direct path to carry signals forward
and also receive them backwards. But,
this existing shortcut is typically
local for a transformer. It usually
doesn't go across layers. So, what Kimi
AI did here is to extend the same idea
across the depth of the network. And
instead of a single residual connection,
the current layer receives a direct path
from every previous layer. So, rather
than inheriting one already mixed
representation, it has access to all
previous intermediate states separately.
But, on top of that, instead of adding
them all equally, the model assigns
weights using attention to each of these
paths in relation to the current layer.
So, each previous layers output becomes
its own signal and the current layer
decides how much to use from each one.
More specifically, the layers forms a
query and compares it against all
earlier layer outputs producing a set of
scores. Then after normalization, these
scores become weights that sum to one
and the final output is just a weighted
combination of those past
representations, which means the
residual path would not be fixed. So
now, the model can amplify certain
layers, ignore others, and dynamically
change this behavior depending on the
input, just like how attention can
selectively pay attention to previous
tokens. What used to be a simple
additive shortcut is now a trainable
input dependent routing mechanism across
depth. Pretty sick, right? But of
course, just like attention, the problem
of quadratic scaling would still hunt
this technique because if there are 128
layers, that's 128 vectors you need to
keep alive in memory and attend over at
every single layer. And if every layer
attends to each other, that's like
around 8,000 attention operations at the
last layer. So, in the paper, they
proposed a more efficient alternative
called the block attention residuals,
where instead of letting every layer
attend to every previous layer
individually, they group layers into
blocks. Within each block, layers behave
like normal when they can attend to
their previous layers, but at the end of
the block, their outputs are combined
into a single summary representation.
Then across blocks, the model only
attends to the summaries and not every
individual layer. So, instead of
attending over 128 separate vectors, you
might only need to attend something like
eight block-level representations where
each block contains around 12 layers.
This reduces both memory and compute
from scaling with the total number of
layers down to scaling with the number
of blocks. So, you trade a bit of
granularity for a massive gain in
efficiency, making the whole approach
practical at scale. But, how big of a
trade-off is this? In a paper, they
showed that this trade-off is
surprisingly small. In this figure, they
plot validation loss against compute for
three setups, the baseline, full
attention residuals, and block attention
residuals. As you can see, both versions
of attention residuals consistently sit
below the baseline curve, meaning that
they achieve lower loss for the same
amount of compute. But, more
importantly, the block version almost
overlaps with the full version. Even
though it's only attending over number
of block summaries instead of every
layer, its curve tracks very closely to
full attention residuals across all
scales. So, the gap between them is
actually very tiny. But, on top of that,
block attention residuals can match the
performance of the baseline while using
about 1.25 times less compute, which is
pretty much getting a 25% discount for
training while paying only 4% more
training overhead. But, after all this
empirical evidence, how does attention
residual actually make sense? Well,
theoretically, this improves information
preservation. Since earlier layers
remain individually accessible, useful
signals don't have to fight to stay
alive through repeated mixing. And the
process of being able to propagate
signals cleanly forward and backwards
through the residual paths made learning
much more efficient. This approach also
fixes the magnitude problem where in the
standard residual setup, layers compete
through magnitude. So, later layers have
to produce larger output to influence
the final representation. So, if you
take a look at figure five, you can see
how the magnitude of the vector stays
consistent for block attention residual
while increases exponentially,
confirming it is relieving this negative
feedback. Because now with
attention-based weighting, they compete
through relevance instead, which is much
better as the model can just assign
higher weight to the layers that matter.
This also increases expressivity along
the depth dimension as you are no longer
having a fixed linear accumulation and
instead a dynamic input-dependent
combination over all layers, which is
much more flexible. So, it is through
these three reasons that attention
residual is able to be more efficient
than the standard setup. For downstream
benchmarks on their 48 billion parameter
model trained on 1.4 trillion tokens, it
improves across every single evaluated
task. And the biggest jumps are
multi-step reasoning like GPQA Diamond
and math, where later layers being able
to selectively reach back and retrieve
earlier representations makes the
biggest difference, which here shown
through better reasoning. But what about
MHC? If you haven't watched my MHC video
previously, then isn't MHC also doing
something similar to residual
connections? At a high level, yeah. Both
of them are trying to fix the same
underlying issue where standard
residuals collapse too much information
into a single stream. But they both
approach it in very different ways. MHC
only works within a layer. So instead of
only having one representation, it keeps
multiple parallel streams and lets them
mix with each other at every layer. So
you can think of it as widening the
network, giving each layer a richer set
of representations to work with at that
specific depth. Whereas attention
residuals work across layers. It doesn't
change what happened inside a layer, but
changes how layers connect over depth.
And each layer can look back and
selectively pull from previous layers.
So they're basically orthogonal
directions, which means in theory you
could combine them. You could have
multiple streams per layer like MHC,
then let each layer attend over all
previous layers using attention
residuals. That would both give you
richer representations at each step and
better control over which path
information to use. But in practice, it
is definitely a bit unclear if there are
benefits. Both methods are ultimately
trying to solve the same bottleneck,
just from different angles. MHC expands
the representation so less information
is lost, while attention residual makes
it easier to recover information later.
So when you stack them, it's highly
likely to get diminishing returns. On
top of that, part of the appeal of
attention residuals is efficiency. The
paper shows it can match or outperform
methods like MHC while using far less
memory and compute overhead. So if you
combine them, you lose that simplicity
and efficiency advantage. And of course,
it's going to make the implementation a
complete nightmare. So, while they're
not redundant in theory, in practice
though, Kim et al.'s framing suggests
that attention residuals is the cleaner
solution, which I do agree that it seems
simpler and a bit more elegant than MHC.
And everything we just talked about
actually holds up at scale. They plugged
attention residuals directly into their
latest Kim et al. linear architecture
without changing the rest of the model.
And they would still see consistent
gains across training, scaling laws, and
downstream benchmarks. On top of that,
to make it work in practice, they had to
solve the efficiency problem. Because
now, instead of just passing one hidden
state between layers, you need to keep
multiple past representations alive and
make them accessible for attention. That
creates both memory pressure and
communication overhead, especially in
large distributed training setups. So,
like 2/3 of the paper is actually
talking about how to make this
efficient. Without getting into it too
much, their block attention residual
design already reduces the number of
things you need to store compared to the
full version. And on top of the other
implementations like two-phase
computation strategy and caching across
pipeline stages. So, the training
overhead is able to be pushed down to
only a few percent and inference latency
increases by less than 2%, which is
almost like nothing. So, now, as you can
see today, Frontier Labs not only have
to figure out how to make cool
architectural breakthrough, but also
implement them at scale to prove that it
actually works. What a sweaty research
landscape we are living in. Not to
mention, the lead author is also a
16-year-old.
Wow. And if you also don't want H capped
and be too behind on the technical side
of LLMs, you should definitely check out
my latest project intuitive.ai.academy,
where I can get you on board to the
frontier of LLMs intuitively without
crazy-looking maths. Ranging from LLM
architectures, MoE, LoRA, to our latest
chapters reinforcement learning, where
we cover how RL works and how it
interacts with LLMs accompany with our
latest interactive visualizations to
help you better understand its logic.
So, for those who want to get into AI or
LLMs, this should be the perfect place
for you to dive into the technical parts
without being intimidated by
crazy-looking maths. And right now, we
are offering a summer discount, so use
the code summer for 25% off a yearly
plan. And thank you guys for watching. A
big shout out to Spam Mage, Chris Ladou,
D Gan, Robert Zaviassa, Marcelo
Ferreria, Poof and Enew, DX Research
Group, Alex, Midwest Maker, and many
others that support me through Patreon
or YouTube. Follow me on Twitter if you
haven't, and I'll see you in the next
one.